Introduction:
I chose this dataset because I was particularly interested in how crime rates have changed over time in Seattle. I was also curious to see what kinds of crime were most eminent in the City of Seattle and which types of crimes were the most prevalent. I also wanted to see how data analysis could uncover this information and to explore the trends in crime data and see how crime tends to aggregate in the City of Seattle. Lastly, I wanted to see what impacts major events could potentially have on crime rates in Seattle. To date, there are several major events that have occurred, across the country, and in Seattle to which I wanted to see how crime rates would be affected by these events. Overall, seeing crime rates and the correlation of variables coincide with each other is what lead me to look deeper into this subject matter. As a researcher based in the City of Seattle, I care deeply for the safety of my city and I wanted to learn more about how data analysis of Seattle could potentially be useful for spotting trends and even perhaps solutions. 

Background and Related Work:
The City of Seattle has seen a relatively high amount of crime over the past several years. This can be attributed to high population rates, an increase in the number of business establishments, and a more limited police response force. Throughout my research, I was able to gain inspiration from and also use some of the previous works that data scientists have done to find answers to some of their own exploratory questions. Many of these visualizations can be found on the open API from which I got the dataset myself (see references). I also did some more digging and found there were other sites that looked into crime rates like the dataset I had pulled from the Seattle API source. While some of the data contradicted each other, for the sake of simplicity and integrity, I went with the Seattle API source as it was backed and verified by our government institution. However, I was able to gain inspiration from other works and lead my research in a similar fashion while also exploring different questions as to not jeopardize the integrity of my research. 

Research Questions:

- Which neighborhoods in Seattle see the most number of crimes?
- Which neighborhoods in Seattle see the most number of crimes over the past 10 years?
- What are some interesting highs and lows of crime rates in different neighborhoods around Seattle?
- How did certain global events such as Covid-19 and the 2008 housing market crash affect crime rates in different neighborhoods in Seattle?

Methodology:
For my research methodology, I decided to delve into my data source using Altair, Pandas, and Numpy to help me manage the data better and to facilitate my work in a more efficient manner. I wanted to explore these research questions particularly because I thought it would be great to produce visualizations of these as some of the visualizations that were produced beforehand were a little outdated. For data cleaning, I mostly used Pandas and Numpy to deal with NA values and to restructure my data to provide me a more comprehensive table of what I wanted to input for my data visualizations. For my data visualizations, I used Altair to provide me with the baseline input for the graphic visualization types I wanted to use. Altair was very good in helping provide me with various different types of graphic visuals and making it flexible enough to incorporate added elements I wanted to show for my graphs. 

Findings:

Which neighborhoods in Seattle see the most number of crimes?
I found that the neighborhoods in Seattle that saw the most number of crimes were Downtown Seattle at 5631 recorded crimes, Queen Anne at 5628 recorded crimes, and Capitol Hill at 5628 crimes. 
Which neighborhoods in Seattle see the most number of crimes in the past 10 years?
The neighborhoods in Seattle that saw the most number of crimes in the past 10 years are Downtown Seattle, Capitol Hill, and Queen Anne. That being said, the Northgate area comes in fourth for overall number of crimes and has seen a steep rise in crime reports over the last 10 years. 
What are some interesting highs and lows of crime rates in different neighborhoods around Seattle?
As it is hard to go through every junction in the City of Seattle, I think the best way to address this answer is to answer it as a whole. Overall, it seems from my dataset and data visualizations that there has been a noticeable spike in crime reports around the 2020-2021 time frame. I think this can be attributed to the BLM protests which led to a standoff between protestors and police. There have been some noticeable spikes in crime reports in other junctions but it would be very difficult to associate causation and or correlation due to the high variability of the data. 
How did certain global events such as Covid-19 and the 2008 housing market crash affect crime rates in different neighborhoods in Seattle?
It seems from the graphic visuals that crime did seem to increase more towards the 2020-2022 time period. While it wasn’t a large jump, there was a noticeable increase in crime reports for several areas in Seattle which could be attributed to the Covid-19 pandemic. However, this is also around the time when the BLM protests also took place so this could also very well be the case. 

Discussion:
Some implications in my study are that some of the graphs may be slightly deceptive. Also, there were some issues with some of the graphic visualizations that I had as not all of them had a great result. Some issues include and are not limited to: Faulty x and y-axis points, deceptive visualizations, skewed graphic visuals (hard to read), and confusing legends/color schemes. Also, one of my visualizations did not include the full final 2023 year of data so it shows the linear regression model dipping to 0 when in reality it is only due to the fact that we have not collected all the data from 2023 yet. Overall though, I do think the data visualizations send a clear point across to the viewers and while there are some faulty errors in my data visualizations, the overall meaning behind it is well thought through and pre-processed to the best of my abilities. Quite simply, working with 1 million different data points in any visualizations is very hard to work with. There are a lot of issues with the data set itself most times and cleaning it to the best of my ability and working around the flaws Altair has (The preset settings did not allow altair to formulate visualizations that exceeded 5000 rows which I addressed by overriding that) is what made some of these issues more transparent. The visualizations also have a limitation in what you can conclude from the dataset as much of the data is oftentime variable and does not follow one statistical trend line. 

Conclusion: 
Overall, the data visualizations that I have created were a great introduction into trends and various different patterns in the SPD Crime Dataset I worked with. While I wished I was able to gain deeper insight into surprising information deducted from my trend analysis of the dataset, I was left disappointed to see that much of the trends upheld my previous assumptions of how the data visualizations would turn out. One thing that did stand out to me, however, was that a lot more crime occurred in areas where socio economic prosperity was relatively well to do. While one might think that a high socioeconomic status of an area may generally mean there is less crime, the opposite could be applied as this would provide more opportunities for theft etc. However, I don’t think there was enough statistical evidence to support this theory so it is simply an afterthought I had while working with my data visualizations. I also think it is clear that a lot of the crime tends to aggregate towards areas of high population. This inevitably provides more opportunities for crimes to occur. That being said, I think crime rates generally do not follow a set standard. Crime rates can explode when big events such as the BLM protests occur and can also be affected simply by the number of people that are agglomerated in an area. I think this research was great at reaffirming my predetermined beliefs and provided great insight into moments where crime spiked and teetered off. This data analysis will be great for policy makers and police forces to look at which areas tend to see the most crime and thus create policies and provide more support for the counties that see crime the most. 


https://data.seattle.gov/Public-Safety/SPD-Crime-Data-2008-Present/tazs-3rd5
https://www.seattle.gov/police/information-and-data/data/crime-dashboard 
https://data.seattle.gov/Public-Safety/Crime-by-neighborhood/em8f-ku87 