Motivation and Problem Statement: 
I am planning on doing this analysis because I am curious to see what our criminal trends are in the City of Seattle and potentially also look at where crime tends to aggregate. I think this could be useful from a scientific standpoint as we can better understand the demographics of criminal activity across our city and find the places that need the most help. Usually, most criminal activity aggregates in lower socioeconomic areas so understanding this, we could potentially find better ways to help our own community. From this dataset, I am hoping to learn more about the demographic trends within criminal activity and see whether or not crime has increased or decreased over the past several years and potentially look at whether or not some areas have increased criminal activity or decreased criminal activity. 

Andrew

Dataset link: https://data.seattle.gov/Public-Safety/SPD-Crime-Data-2008-Present/tazs-3rd5 

Data Selected for Analysis: 
The dataset I am proposing is the SPD Crime Data: 2008 - Present dataset. In this dataset there are 1.05 million rows and 17 columns. The column names are as follows: Report Number; Offense ID; Offense Start DateTime; Offense End DateTime; Report DateTime; Group A B; Crime Against Category; Offense Parent Group; Offense; Offense Code; Precinct; Sector; Beat; MCPP; 100 Block Address; Longitude; Latitude. As this is an open data source from the City of Seattle, licensing is a bit of a tricky issue as it is accessible to anyone. That being said, the credit goes to the dataset owner which is Seattle Police Department by 7843 Bridge, Mark C. This dataset is perfect for my analysis because I am trying to look into demographic data about criminal trends in the City of Seattle. With this information I can access the exact geographical location of the incident and also perhaps index my data by its severity. Some ethical considerations that do come up are how could this possibly affect certain demographic neighborhoods, how could this potentially affect the individuals who are listed, and how do we use this data to benefit certain research. Taking this into consideration, I will make sure that if this dataset is used, nobody will come into harm's way and the data will only be used for educational purposes. 


Unknowns and Dependencies: 
Some factors that may impact my ability to get this final project done at the end of the quarter are the lack of processing power to filter through 1.05 million rows, a lack of tools to filter and provide useful visualizations, and hindrances of uncleaned datasets which would make certain algorithmic processes harder are all factors that could potentially delay my end date. However, the biggest problem is currently the sheer amount of data in this dataset and it would be a nightmare to deal with that many variables all at one time. Perhaps a way to circumvent this is to narrow down the data set and limit the number of rows used to 4-5 that way the project can be more manageable. 


Overview: 
In this final project, I am going to be analyzing the Seattle PD crime data from the open Seattle API data source to determine various trends in crime within the city of Seattle. The motivation for this project is to find these analytical trends and to potentially apply our findings to seek real world solutions. Crime has always been a big issue within the city of Seattle and I want to see how this data can be used to benefit us. 


Research Questions:
- How do crime rates compare in different socio economic areas of Seattle?

- Given the downtime during Covid, how did Covid affect overall crime rates in Seattle? Did it even have an impact?

- Which areas in Seattle see the most crime?

- What areas in Seattle have seen the most increase in crime over the past 10 years?

- Does higher agglomeration of businesses correlate to higher rates of property crime?


Background and related work:

https://www.seattle.gov/police/information-and-data/data/crime-dashboard 

The link provided has a lot of meta data on several of the research questions I have posed. From the analytics, it shows that crime rates actually increased during the years of 2020-2022. This shows that crime rates did indeed go up during covid. Furthermore, from the analytics, I can see that there are indeed disproportionate numbers of crime happening in specific areas in Seattle. From these findings, I think my research questions are indeed worth looking into and also informed me of how I should conduct my research. I will go more in depth on some of the research questions. For example, I want to know the various kinds of crimes happening within areas that have disproportionately more crime than other areas to see what kind of criminal motivations may be occuring. 


Methodology:
The analytical methods I am hoping to use to answer my questions is through a recurrent neural network. However, the data may prove to be too large to feed into a neural network and there are also concerns around the feasibility of putting a neural network into use so I may just end up cutting down my data to the past 5-10 years and looking at more specific trends from that. If a neural network is not an option then I plan on falling back on a linear regression model in which I can find a trend line to support my research questions. Furthermore, I plan on representing my findings through a bar chart, heat map, dot plot, time series graph, and a table. This is a bit aggressive so if time does not allow, I may end up going with only a heat map, time series graph with a dot plot, and a table. I believe that these methods are useful for representing my research questions because a dot plot will be able to show us what specific kinds of crimes are happening on the time series graph and at what times throughout the year so we can gain further analytical insight across time and potentially see whether or not one particular type of crime has gone up in numbers. A heat map would be very useful in portraying which areas in Seattle are currently experiencing a large number of criminal activity. Lastly, a table would be appropriate to show variables such as crime rates during covid to show accurate data instead of data on a graphic visual, although a graphic visual going along with the table may be more useful. 
